---
title: Zen in the art of climbing
description: On the impossibility of writing about Zen, the trap of grading rocks, and why our best climbing performances are precisely the ones where the "I" disappears.
date: 2025-05-24
tags:
  - musings
  - climbing
  - philosophy
  - zen
---

It's quite hard to write anything about Zen without it sounding either like trivial or like gibberish. Above all else Zen is about engaging with the raw reality, before any intermediate steps of reasoning, abstraction, or representation intervene. Doing away with "forms", with symbols that are *about* reality and not reality itself. Along the same lines, it's about engaging with the here and now, which is the only thing that ever exists, since past and future are nothing but creations of the mind. There is nothing to get at, nothing to attain, because "you" are always that which is now. The concept of the self is just that, a concept. We are not self-contained objects, but rather processes, as much caused by the environment as we act on the environment ourselves. When sitting, just sit. When walking, just walk. When hungry, eat; when tired, sleep. That's all there is to it. Trying to attain enlightenment is to lose it. Wu wei, doing by not doing. Not trying, not forcing. Spontaneous action. 

How do any of these ideas pertain to climbing? Not at all, since climbing itself is just a concept and not the action. We don't need outside concepts to help us during the act of climbing. The only thing we need to do is climb. When climbing, just climb. If you're thinking about reaching the top, you're not climbing. If concerned about the people watching, this is not climbing either. Only climbing is climbing. Assigning grades to rocks is nonsensical. A piece of rock is not a grade. A grade is just a concept. How can you climb a concept? Wanting to climb better makes you worse at climbing. We learn the names of climbing moves only to restrict our ability to move, the same way that the 5 tastes make a man unable to taste, the 5 tones make a man deaf, and the 5 colours blind.

Indeed, during our best climbing performances, we forget our "selves". There is nothing there apart from effort and movement. Sometimes, we are surprised to find ourselves at the top of the wall or the route, hardly believing that we made it through the crux that stumped us numerous times before. I'd say it's because "we" didn't make it through anything. If we had remained an "I", with all the baggage this comes with, then that would stop us from doing the climb at all. Only at a lower level than our limit can we maintain a sense of ego and still make it up. This is of course similar to Mihalyi Csikszentmihalyi's "flow", a state of effortless being, where the challenge is great enough to require and induce an ego-less performance, action without reflection on the self or others, the past or the future, just being now. 

We cannot observe such states in the moment, since that would require someone doing the observation, and in those moments there is noone to do the observing, there is just centre-less action. Only in retrospect can we identify those moments, and lament that we have now lost them, which itself takes us out of the moment. The sport of climbing routinely pushes us to reinforce our sense of an ego, with all the importance placed on the highest grade climbed, the improvement over time, the comparison with others, the possibility of falling and ceasing to exist.

But how can we "not try"? Trying to not try is itself trying so it cannot stop the trying. The mere act of starting up a specific route is an act of trying to top that route. As with goals, I guess the best way to "set it and forget it", start up a climb and then just climb. Easier said than done. Many times, pros say that we have to try harder, trying hard is a skill that only the very best manage to perfect, and that doing hard climbs requires it. So what gives? On the other hand, the person who I most like to see climbing, Sorato Anraku, climbs incredibly difficult things without even looking like he's trying hard. It's like magic. The same for Zidane, effortless elegance. 

Wanting to climb better is a trap that keeps you grasping for some future state when you will be content. It's the [[Arrival fallacy]], dressed up as self-improvement. But not trying to improve, means you don't engage in deliberate practice, which studies show is required to reach mastery in a pursuit. So neither trying to improve, nor not trying work. And yet, somehow, we improve. "Bokuju was once asked, "We have to dress and eat every day, and how can we escape from all that?" The master replied, "We dress; we eat." "I do not understand." "If you do not understand, put on your dress and eat your food." ".
